website/docs: update command formattings for easier dev usage (#15430)
goauthentik/authentik: website/docs/developer-docs/setup/full-dev-environment.mdx

Before you begin, ensure you have the following tools installed:

- [Python](https://www.python.org/) (3.13 or later)
- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/) (Latest stable release)
- [Go](https://go.dev/) (1.24 or later)
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en) (24 or later)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) (16 or later)
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) (Latest Community Edition or Docker Desktop)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) (Compose v2)

## 1. Setting Up Required Services

authentik depends on several external services:

- [Redis](https://redis.io/) for caching
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) for database storage
- [Zenko CloudServer (S3)](https://www.zenko.io/cloudserver/) for object storage
- [Sentry Spotlight](https://spotlightjs.com/) for error tracking and visualization

### Option A: Using Docker Compose (Recommended)

The easiest way to set up these services is using the provided Docker Compose configuration:

```shell
docker compose -f scripts/docker-compose.yml up -d
```

### Option B: Using local installations

Alternatively, you can install and run these services directly on your system.

:::info

> If using locally installed databases, ensure the PostgreSQL credentials provided to authentik have `CREATE DATABASE` and `DROP DATABASE` permissions, as authentik creates temporary databases for testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If using locally installed databases, ensure the PostgreSQL credentials provided to authentik have `CREATE DATABASE` and `DROP DATABASE` permissions, because authentik creates temporary databases for testing.
```

Reviewer: The rest of the rewording is great, but for sure we want to use "because" instead of "as" (because "as" has many meanings, and is less ESL-friendly).

:::

## 2. Installing Platform-Specific Dependencies

<Tabs defaultValue="Mac">
<TabItem value="Mac">

Install the required native dependencies on macOS using Homebrew:

```shell
brew install \
libxmlsec1 \
libpq \
krb5 \
pkg-config \
uv \
postgresql \
redis \
node@24 \
golangci-lint
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Linux">

For Debian/Ubuntu-based distributions:

```shell
pip install uv && \
sudo apt-get install -y \
libgss-dev \
krb5-config \
libkrb5-dev \
postgresql-server-dev-all \
postresql \
redis
```

> For other distributions (Red Hat, SUSE, Arch), adjust the package names as needed.

Reviewer: Nice edit...

Install `golangci-lint` by following the [official installation instructions](https://golangci-lint.run/welcome/install/#other-ci).

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Windows">

We're currently seeking community input on running the full development environment on Windows. If you have experience with this setup, please consider contributing to this documentation.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## 3. Setting up the backend

:::info
All `make` commands must be executed from the root directory of your local authentik Git repository.
:::

> ### Installing dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install dependencies
```

Install all required JavaScript and Python dependencies and create an isolated Python environment:

```shell
make install
```

> ### Generating Development Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Generate Development Configuration
```

Create a local configuration file that uses the local databases for development:

```shell
make gen-dev-config
```

### Understanding the Architecture

authentik is primarily a Django application running under gunicorn, proxied by a Go application that serves static files.
For better code navigation, most functions and classes have type hints and docstrings. We recommend installing a Python Type-checking Extension in your IDE.

> ## 4. Setting Up the Frontend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 4. Set up the frontend
```

## Services Setup

> For PostgreSQL and Redis, you can use the `docker-compose.yml` file in `/scripts` folder to run pre-configured database instances.

Reviewer 2: not "/scripts" as the leading / would indicate it's "scripts" as of fs root.

Reviewer 2: or 

(cd scripts && docker compose up -d)

which would run it in a subshell meaning you don't need to cd back

Reviewer 3: Yeah, the original phrasing is not mine, but I think the original author meant "pre-configured" to mean "you don't have to download and set it up on your machine", which is what the next paragraph recommends. 

Maybe instead:

You can use the `docker-compose.yml` file in `scripts/` to run the PostgreSQL and Redis instances necessary for authentik to work.

Reviewer 2: huh
![IMG_1882](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2d0ad7eb-b53f-4f49-b30b-becc0d00ae12)

Reviewer 3: This section has a follow up that says 

`You can also use a native installation if you prefer.`

This docker-compose also has sentry spotlight and an S3 solution. Would the user have to have these installed for it to work, or could they get away with just installing redis and postgresql?

Honestly, I feel like it would be better to sidestep everything and make this as straightforward as possible by just saying:

```
You can use the docker-compose.yml file in scripts/ to run the services necessary for authentik to work.

docker compose -f scripts/docker-compose.yml up -d

You can also use native installations of the services in the docker-compose.yml if you prefer.
```

Reviewer 2: Just a quick suggestion. Still can't wrap my head around "services authentik depends on" for some reason. As you wish. However, id include "in the scripts directory" instead of just "in scripts"

```diff
- You can use the docker-compose.yml file in scripts/ to run the services necessary for authentik to work.
+ You can use the docker-compose.yml file in the scripts/ directory to launch the services authentik depends on.
```

Reviewer 2: We might even consider linking their website at https://www.zenko.io/cloudserver/ instead of GH and updating the image from docker.io/zenko/cloudserver to ghcr.io/scality/cloudserver as the current image is unmaintained and was last updated 2 years ago

```shell

> cd scripts

Reviewer 2: docker compose -f scripts/docker-compose.yml up -d ?

Reviewer 2: or 

(cd scripts && docker compose up -d)

which would run it in a subshell meaning you don't need to cd back

Reviewer 4: +1 on the `docker compose -f scripts/docker-compose.yml up -d`

## Services Setup

> authentik uses [Redis](https://redis.io/), [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/), [S3](https://www.zenko.io/cloudserver/), and [Sentry Spotlight](https://spotlightjs.com/). You can run these services using the docker-compose.yml file in the scripts/ directory with the following command:

Reviewer 2: Technically, we're using an S3-compatible solution

```suggestion
authentik uses [Redis](https://redis.io/), [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/), [Zenko CloudServer (S3)](https://www.zenko.io/cloudserver/), and [Sentry Spotlight](https://spotlightjs.com/). You can run these services using the docker-compose.yml file in the scripts/ directory with the following command:
```

Reviewer 2: Furthermore, even if this is the full-dev-environment page, what do you think of adding a few extra words to make it clear a7k uses this for development. Just a nit on my side

  <TabItem value="mac">
    To install the native dependencies on macOS, run:

    ```shell
    brew install libxmlsec1 libpq krb5 pkg-config  # Required development libraries,

>     brew install uv postgresql redis node@24 golangci-lint   # Required CLI tools

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    brew install uv postgresql redis node@24 golangci-lint  # Required CLI tools
```

Not same number of spaces

Reviewer 2: p.s. How do we want to do spaces? 2 of them? 1? Whichever you prefer. Personally, i'd go for one

Reviewer 3: hahaha docs can seriously get so oddly detailed. And it's sad because the biggest lesson of docs is realizing that most engineers don't read most of what you write, they mainly look at your code samples and copy and paste until it works 🤣 . Honestly having working code samples that are visible as quickly as possible and as easy as possible to copy and run is probably the biggest part of docs. There's a great video on it I can send you if you'd like

Reviewer 2: I totally agree. A good marketing first impression is always quite useful. Sure, you can send that video over. I don't think you have Slack access yet so it's a video for all to see on GH.

Reviewer 2: > they need to make a plugin that makes it so when you click the copy button, it doesn't add comments

We can mabye patch the Docuthingy (I can never get the name right) component? Either via some fancy code or directly in the node_modules

Reviewer 3: Here's the vid — it's a good watch https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hTMuAPaKMI4

That would be awesome if it's something we could find the time for. It sounds like you `swizzle` a code block to give it custom functionality. It would be worth open-sourcing and sharing IMO, the balance of good dev experience for them to copy the code block without problems and also having the context right there is really nice

Reviewer 3: Yeah if we don't open source it and it's just a little piece of logic, it's not a big deal. Could throw it in a gist and share it with friends or something but it would be way better to just have it instead of worrying about the open source aspect

Reviewer 2: Well it's going to be on the website, probably in website/src/components, so it's going ot be opensource anyways. Just wondering if it's worth the investment cc @GirlBossRush

    ```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="linux">
To install native dependencies on Debian or Ubuntu, run:

```shell
pip install uv && \

> sudo apt-get install -y libgss-dev krb5-config libkrb5-dev \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sudo apt-get install -y \
  libgss-dev \
  krb5-config \
  libkrb5-dev \
  postgresql-server-dev-all \
  postgresql \
  redis
```

Reviewer 2: We could do the longer format. I've seen this quite a lot compared to everything on 2 lines like it was before

  <TabItem value="mac">
    To install the native dependencies on macOS, run:

    ```shell
    brew install libxmlsec1 libpq krb5 pkg-config  # Required development libraries,
    brew install uv postgresql redis node@24 golangci-lint   # Required CLI tools
    ```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="linux">
To install native dependencies on Debian or Ubuntu, run:

```shell

> pip install uv

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it be better to use Astral's sh installer for uv? removes dependency on pip completely and gives more control

Reviewer 2: Uhhhhh sure i guess

Reviewer 3: No I know it's super pedantic and seems minuscule, but it ended up being a whole thing at Cloudflare to a level that we rewrote some docs over it iirc. It was definitely part of the docs requirements to not do that. It's not a bad idea, I just feel like we're safer erring on the side of being a little overly safe

Reviewer 2: For sure, you have more big tech experience than me. One of the reasons I also mentioned it is that i've had bad experience installing pip packages, however if it's the recommended way and doesn't make the user do backflips to install it, LGTM

:::

:::info

> All `make` commands need to be run in the root of your local authentik git repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All `make` commands must be executed from the root directory of your local authentik Git repository.
```

:::

> Install all required JavaScript and Python dependencies and create an isolated Python environment:

Reviewer 2: All required Python (core), TS (f-e), and golang (outposts + proxy) deps

Reviewer 3: Would you propose the full sentence to be:

Install all required Python (core), TypeScript (front end), and golang (outposts + proxy) dependencies and create an isolated Python environment:

Reviewer 2: We already have an architecture page which *should* cover that. We could link it instead of enumerating what is what

```shell
make install
```

> Then generate a local config file to use the local databases for development:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, generate a local configuration file to use the local databases for development:
```

Reviewer 2: There's the comma, but the local config does wayyyy more than just configure the database's settings

The UI requires the authentik API files for Typescript be built and installed:

```shell
make migrate   # Runs database migrations

> make gen       # Generates schema files (schema.yml, blueprints/schema.json) and the TypeScript client.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we also gen the go api? I don't think the Makefile includes that command under `make gen`. Can be for a later MR, just pointing it out.

## Frontend Setup

By default, no compiled bundle of the frontend is included so this step is required even if you're not developing for the UI.

> The UI requires the authentik API files for Typescript be built and installed.

Reviewer 2: I feel like we could be clearer here. API files != api package. "build" not necessarily, either the package on npm or the result of the gen command

Reviewer 3: To be honest, I'm a little new to the codebase and am a little confused myself as to what's happening in here. Would you be willing to help with a little copy for this section? It would probably help me understand what's happening in this area as well

Reviewer 2: This diff is awful, I'm gonna try to run this locally., Gimme a sec

You first need to run database migrations:

```shell
make migrate
```

> And then you need to generate the schema files (schema.yml, blueprints/schema.json) and the TypeScript client:

Reviewer 2: Sentences should not start with words such as "an". If we insist on including the file names, they should be in `code`

Reviewer 3: I love starting sentences with and. It's extremely common in my writing. But if it's against our docs style guide, no problem, I'll save it for other writings I do and keep it out of the docs

And yeah, I'll update those to being in ticks

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's explicitly in our style guide. We can keep it this way if Tana doesn't mind, however you'll make my French teacher cry cc @tanberry

```shell
make gen
```

:::info
If you make changes to the authentik API, you must re-run `make gen` so that the corresponding
changes are made to the API library that is used by the UI.
:::

You can do a one time build of the UI:

```shell
make web-build
```

> Or you can live-edit the UI, allowing you to see updates you make in real time without needing to rebuild:

Reviewer 2: Technically, you don't need to rebuilt it yourself, but saying " without needing to rebuild" Would be inaccurate. I suggest:

```suggestion
You can also make live edits to the UI, with real-time feedback as updates are rebuilt automatically:
```

Also, I would think it's best to not start sentences with Or

The UI requires the authentik API files for Typescript be built and installed:

```shell

> make migrate   # On a fresh install, ensures the API schema file is available

Reviewer 2: Isn't make migrate for the database? not the api schema

Reviewer 5: It is. And `make gen` generates the api schema (which shouldn't be needed after a fresh clone) and the various API clients (go and ts)

Reviewer 4: `make migrate` is required for the schema generation to work, but the comment is incorrect

Reviewer 2: LGTM for first; The second one generates the schema.yml + blueprints/schema.json as well as the typescript client, so I'd slightly revisit that description

## Submitting Pull Requests

Before submitting a pull request, you'll need to make sure that:

The code is properly linted:

```shell
make lint
```

We've generated an updated OpenAPI Doc for our changes:

```shell
make gen
```

> And we've formatted our front-end code:

Reviewer 3: Alright, I'll swap this to "front end"

```shell
make web
```

> You can do all of these at once with the following:

Reviewer 2: Well... Personally, I feel like this last bit isn't required

Reviewer 3: I had the feeling the original author's intent was to give something that could be copied and pasted and ran all at once before each push. The only reason I added this at the end was to preserve what I assumed they had intended to do. I think it makes more sense to make our own make command like `make pre-commit` and handle all of those together. I am completely fine with removing this

When using Docker Desktop, host networking needs to be enabled via **Docker Settings** > **Resources** > **Network** > **Enable host networking**.
:::

## 6. Contributing code

### Before submitting a pull request

Ensure your code meets our quality standards by running:

1. **Code linting**:

    ```shell
    make lint
    ```

2. **Generate updated API documentation**:

    ```shell
    make gen
    ```

3. **Format frontend code**:

    ```shell
    make web
    ```

You can run all these checks at once with:

```shell
make lint gen web
```

### Submitting your changes

Once your code passes all checks, you can submit a pull request through [GitHub](https://github.com/goauthentik/authentik/pulls). Be sure to:

- Provide a clear description of your changes
- Reference any related issues

> - Follow our code style guidelines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Follow our code style guidelines
- Update any related documentation
```
